ByDavid G. Baker, DVM, MS, PhD, DACLAM, Division of Laboratory Animal Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University

Eyeworms (_Thelazia californiensis_ and _T. callipaeda_) are parasites found in dogs, cats, and other animals, including humans, in the western United States, Europe, and Asia. They are whitish, 0.5 to 0.75 inches (7 to 19 millimeters) long, and move in a rapid snake-like motion across the eye. Up to 100 eyeworms may be seen in the conjunctival sac, tear ducts, and on the conjunctiva under the nictitating membrane (third eyelid) and eyelids. Filth flies (including the common house fly) and, possibly, fruit flies serve as intermediate hosts and deposit the infective eyeworm larvae on the eye while feeding on secretions from the eyes.

Signs include excessive watering of the eyes, inflammation of the conjunctiva, itchiness of the eyes, opaque corneas with slow-healing sores, and rarely, blindness. After a local anesthetic is applied, diagnosis and treatment are accomplished by observing and carefully removing the parasites with forceps. Some veterinarians have reported the successful elimination of _Thelazia_ infections from dogs with medications injected under the skin, taken by mouth, or applied to the skin as a spot-on. Certain eye solutions or ointments also may be effective. Your veterinarian will evaluate your pets situation and take the most appropriate treatment approach.

Copyright  2026 Merck  Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.

This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion.(https:www.essentialaccessibility.commsdmanualsutm_sourcemsdmanualshomepageutm_mediumiconlargeutm_termeachannelpageutm_contentheaderutm_campaignmsdmanuals)

This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion.(https:www.essentialaccessibility.commsdmanualsutm_sourcemsdmanualshomepageutm_mediumiconlargeutm_termeachannelpageutm_contentheaderutm_campaignmsdmanuals)

Copyright 2026Merck  Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.

We suggest you choose Customize my Settings to make your individualized choices. Accept Cookies means that you are choosing to accept third-party Cookies and that you understand this choice.