Merck  Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA (MSD)has a long history of providing medical information to both human and animal health care professionals. For more than 70 years, the  _MSD Veterinary Manual_(_MVM_) has provided veterinarians and other animal health professionals with concise and authoritative information on diseases and management of food-producing, companion, laboratory, zoo, and pet exotic animals. The contents of the MVM are available digitally both on the website and as a free, downloadable app for handheld devices, providing enhanced capability to quickly access needed information.

Although the contents of the MVM have expanded with each edition, the MVM remains true to its original objective: a concise, easy-to-use, commercial-free, comprehensive reference, written and reviewed exclusively by veterinarians, that covers the diversity of species and animal diseases worldwide. Coverage is straightforward and practical, with explicit recommendations given for treatment whenever possible. The succinct discussions also serve to give readers a strong foundation for seeking out and understanding more detailed information available elsewhere.

The MVM covers all the basics, but it is also often relied on for areas not commonly encountered in the daily routine of most animal health professionals. This is no more evident than in the growing role of veterinarians in todays environment, in which general practitioners and specialists alike must practice awareness and vigilance in recognizing the impact of the international movement of animals, maintaining a safe food supply, and minimizing the spread of infectious animal disease and the threat of zoonoses.

The MVM also remains committed to engaging and serving the educational needs of users in various ways through multiple social media sites, working relationships with students, partnership activity to increase use and availability of our content, and exploring new avenues to offer additional multimedia and other tools.

As always, we are deeply grateful to the authors and reviewers who have contributed to the current and past editions of the MVM. The MVM is an extensive collaboration of the MVM Editorial Board and more than 400 veterinary experts from academia, industry, government, research organizations, and specialty practices, representing more than 20 countries worldwide. It is only through their dedication to animal health and their efforts and willingness to share their time and expertise that the MVM is possible.

The MVM content is continually updated and expanded online. Updated topics are routinely listed on our home page and on various social media.

This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion.(https:www.essentialaccessibility.commsdmanualsutm_sourcemsdmanualshomepageutm_mediumiconlargeutm_termeachannelpageutm_contentheaderutm_campaignmsdmanuals)

This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion.(https:www.essentialaccessibility.commsdmanualsutm_sourcemsdmanualshomepageutm_mediumiconlargeutm_termeachannelpageutm_contentheaderutm_campaignmsdmanuals)

Copyright 2026Merck  Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.

We suggest you choose Customize my Settings to make your individualized choices. Accept Cookies means that you are choosing to accept third-party Cookies and that you understand this choice.