ALL CONTENT, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION INFORMATION, TEXT, GRAPHICS, IMAGES, MATERIALS, SOFTWARE, ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) FEATURES, AND OTHER SERVICES, INCLUDED IN OR OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY THE MANUALS (THE CONTENT), IS FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY, IS NOT INTENDED TO BE COMPREHENSIVE, AND IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL ADVICE, DIAGNOSIS, OR TREATMENT. The Manuals is not intended to guide the medical care of any person(s) or animal(s). The Content is not a substitute for prescribing information provided by the manufacturer of a drug(s) or other health care product(s) (sometimes referred to as the package insert or drug label); before prescribing, administering, or using any drug or other health care product, health care professionals and consumers are advised to review the prescribing information provided by the manufacturer of said drug or health care product.

Because of variability and continual changes in medical information, practice guidelines, and practice standards, the Content may vary from other medical information sources or may be out of date. Errors may be introduced during the creation and publishing processes of the Content. Use of AI, including without limitation The Manuals AI-enhanced search, to summarize portions of or all the Content or generate any additional derivative content using portions of the Content may also introduce errors. Users should consult a variety of reliable medical information sources.

The Manuals cannot guarantee the accuracy, comprehensiveness, timeliness, quality, or suitability for any purpose(s) of any content or information generated by AI, including without limitation The Manuals AI-enhanced search. The Manuals assumes no responsibility for any erroneous results due to defects in AI, including without limitation The Manuals AI-enhanced search. ACCESS TO AND USE OF AI, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION THE MANUALS AI-ENHANCED SEARCH, IS PROVIDED WITHOUT WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR ANY OTHER WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. In no event shall The Manuals be liable for special, direct, indirect or consequential damages, charges, claims, costs, demands, losses fees or expenses of any nature or kind arising from use of AI, including without limitation The Manuals AI-enhanced search. The Manuals does not assume any responsibility for any decisions made or actions taken by any individual(s) or entity(s) based on any content or information generated by AI, including without limitation The Manuals AI-enhanced search. Access to and use of AI, including without limitation the Manuals AI-enhanced search, does not establish any doctor-patient or other medical, healthcare, professional, or client-based relationship. Users of AI included in or otherwise provided by the Manuals, including without limitation The Manuals AI-enhanced search, should report any errors or concerns with AI responses in addition to any other feedback regarding AI responses to the Manuals using the following contact page: Contact Us - MSD Veterinary Version.

Neither The Manuals nor any other party involved in the preparation, publication or distribution of The Manuals shall be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting in whole or part from any use by an individual(s), entity(s), or other user(s) of or reliance upon The Manuals, including without limitation The Manuals AI-enhanced search, and the information contained therein.

The Manuals is intended to be consistent with medical practice and information in the United States. Outside of the United States, practice guidelines, practice standards, and professional opinion may differ. Users of The Manuals both inside and outside of the United States are advised to consult local medical care providers and medical information resources.

The Content is originally prepared in English. The translation of portions of or all the Content from one language to another may introduce errors or mistranslations that change the intended meaning of the Content. The Manuals does not control nor assume any responsibility for translation, summarization, or other processes that may alter the Content by any entity or tool, including without limitation AI or digital translation applications.

To the extent portions of the Content are licensed from external third parties or link to external third-party resources, The Manuals does not control nor assume any responsibility for any content, including without limitation information, text, graphics, images, materials, software, AI features, and other services, included in, provided by, or linked to by external third-party resources.

The Content in The Manuals is provided free of charge as a corporate sustainability initiative of Merck  Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, known as MSD outside of the USA and Canada, (the Company). The Manuals are not intended to promote, market, commercialize, or otherwise publicize any product of the Company or of any other company or person(s). The Content does not contain any marketing or sales materials or any drug labelling for any product of the Company or for any product of any other company or person(s).

By using the Content in The Manuals, including without limitation any AI features, all users of The Manuals agree to abide by United States and International copyright laws and all other applicable laws involving copyright.

This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion.(https:www.essentialaccessibility.commsdmanualsutm_sourcemsdmanualshomepageutm_mediumiconlargeutm_termeachannelpageutm_contentheaderutm_campaignmsdmanuals)

This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion.(https:www.essentialaccessibility.commsdmanualsutm_sourcemsdmanualshomepageutm_mediumiconlargeutm_termeachannelpageutm_contentheaderutm_campaignmsdmanuals)

Copyright 2026Merck  Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.

We suggest you choose Customize my Settings to make your individualized choices. Accept Cookies means that you are choosing to accept third-party Cookies and that you understand this choice.